Create PGSAUT-abstract.md (#406)
alan-turing-institute/AutisticaCitizenScience: applications/PGSAUT-abstract.md

# Abstract for The PGSA@UT Philosophy Conference

### Abstract for submission to The [Philosophy Graduate Student Association at The University of Tennessee Philosophy Conference](http://utkphilgradconference.weebly.com/) March 13-14 2021

## Hacking's Human Kinds and the Ethics of Participatory Science 

Drawing on Hacking’s ([1996](doi.org/\10.1093\acprof:oso\9780198524021.001.0001) influential concept of the ‘looping effects of human kinds’, this paper will explore the ethical implications of the dynamics between researchers and research subjects in scientific practice. 
We argue that scientists engaged in work about human kinds have a moral duty to include research subjects in their work. 
We will then ground the theoretical discussion with a case study of participatory science in action: a project to build a tool to investigate autism and sensory processing through the participatory co-creation of a citizen science platform. 

> This project is a collaboration between the research charity Autistica and The Alan Turing Institute, the UK’s national institute for AI and data science. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This project is a collaboration between the UK-based research charity Autistica and The Alan Turing Institute, the UK’s national institute for AI and data science. 
```

Reviewer: If it is UK-based, suggest specifying this for an international audience (if it isn't, ignore this!)

More detail, current work, outputs, resources and engagement pathways are all available on the [project’s repository](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/AutisticaCitizenScience).

The presentation of this paper will itself follow participatory practices: it will be co-presented by an autistic participant, point attendees to open and transparent research protocols and data, and everyone will be invited to join as collaborators.

We begin by exploring how existing scientific practices base themselves on a division between researchers and research subjects. 
To do so, we explore Hacking’s account of human kinds and provide the example of autism. 
We briefly review recent trends in the study of autism and argue that the gap traditionally conceived between “knowers” and those who are “known” raises ethical concerns.

The ethical concerns we discuss are similar to those of feminist scholars at large and standpoint theorists in particular. 
We will consider what Miranda Fricker (2007) calls “epistemic injustice”. 
By Fricker’s account, prejudice about certain stereotypes render their testimony noncredible. 
When these stereotypes are incorrect, an epistemic injustice is produced. 

> This is because social injustices are perpetuated through the incorrectly assigned stereotype and science cannot provide more accurate knowledge on the research subject., research findings are sanctioned by scientific institutions and afforded authority by society. 

Reviewer 2: Think there may be a missing sentence or a typo going on with the `.,` here :)

> This is because social injustices are perpetuated through incorrectly assigned stereotypes. Despite the research subject being an expert of the own experience, research findings are sanctioned by scientific institutions and afforded authority by society. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because social injustices are perpetuated through incorrectly assigned stereotypes. Despite the research subject being an expert of the own experience, research findings are recognised by scientific institutions and afforded authority by society. 
```

Reviewer: I suggest removing the word 'sanctioned' because it has two contradictory meanings.

Author: Yeah, sanctioned is such a confusing one. For the longest time I thought there was only one meaning of 'sanctioned' which for some reason I could never remember. Realising it actually has 2 meanings was totally shocking, like discovering someone you thought is one person is actually two identical twins.

This results in social policies and norms that further reproduce social injustices. Such divisions are further entrenched by societal inequality which can create barriers to scientific institutions and education.

[Sue Fletcher-Watson et. al., (2019)](https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361318786721) further emphasise the cruciality of interrogating and redressing power disbalance in research. 
Power asymmetry is associated with significant adverse effects for those disempowered. On an individual level, power asymmetry can lower self-esteem ([Wojciszke & Struzynska–Kujalowicz, 2007](https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2007.25.4.472)), reduce the sense of agency ([Martin et al., 2003](#book-references)), and leads to reduced empathy in those wielding power, who can pathologize difference as dysfunction [Galinsky et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01824.x).

Having problematised the division between “knowers” and “known”, we return to Hacking’s looping effects to argue that, given the self-reflecting nature of human kinds, scientists ought to integrate this into their practice. 

> In other words, given that researchers, in “knowing” about the social world, shape the very subject they study, they should fix the ethical principles guid their research from the start. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In other words, given that researchers, in “knowing” about the social world, shape the very subject they study, they should fix the ethical principles guiding their research from the start. 
```

> To both fix these ethical principles and study human kinds, we suggest that bringing research subjects into the research process is an adequate way to conduct science that is pertinent to human kinds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To both fix these ethical principles and study human kinds, we suggest that bringing research subjects into the research process is a crucial way to conduct science that is pertinent to human kinds.
```

Reviewer: I would go further than 'adequate' here.

Author: I went for ethically compelling as there may be other solutions or exceptions.
